When I was fourteen or fifteen I was an odious little snob, but no worse
than other boys of my own age and class. I suppose there is no place in the
world where snobbery is quite so ever-present or where it is cultivated in
such refined and subtle forms as in an English public school. Here at least
one cannot say that English 'education' fails to do its job. You forget
your Latin and Greek within a few months of leaving school--I studied
Greek for eight or ten years, and now, at thirty-three, I cannot even
repeat the Greek alphabet--but your snobbishness, unless you persistently
root it out like the bindweed it is, sticks by you till your grave.

At school I was in a difficult position, for I was among boys who, for
the most part, were much richer than myself, and I only went to an
expensive public school because I happened to win a scholarship. This is
the common experience of boys of the lower-upper-middle class, the sons of
clergymen, Anglo-Indian officials, etc., and the effects it had on me were
probably the usual ones. On the one hand it made me cling tighter than ever
to my gentility; on the other hand it filled me with resentment against the
boys whose parents were richer than mine and who took care to let me know
it. I despised anyone who was not describable as a 'gentleman', but also I
hated the hoggishly rich, especially those who had grown rich too recently.
The correct and elegant thing, I felt, was to be of gentle birth but to
have no money. This is part of the credo of the lower-upper-middle class.
It has a romantic, Jacobite-in-exile feeling about it which is very
comforting.

But those years, during and just after the war, were a queer time to
be at school, for England was nearer revolution than she has been since or
had been for a century earlier. Throughout almost the whole nation there
was running a wave of revolutionary feeling which has since been reversed
and forgotten, but which has left various deposits of sediment behind.
Essentially, though of course one could not then see it in perspective, it
was a revolt of youth against age, resulting directly from the war. In the
war the young had been sacrificed and the old had behaved in a way which,
even at this distance of time, is horrible to contemplate; they had been
sternly patriotic in safe places while their sons went down like swathes of
hay before the German machine guns. Moreover, the war had been conducted
mainly by old men and had been conducted with supreme incompetence. By 1918
everyone under forty was in a bad temper with his elders, and the mood of
anti-militarism which followed naturally upon the fighting was extended
into a general revolt against orthodoxy and authority. At that time there
was, among the young, a curious cult of hatred of 'old men'. The dominance
of 'old men' was held to be responsible for every evil known to humanity,
and every accepted institution from Scott's novels to the House of Lords
was derided merely because 'old men' were in favour of it. For several
years it was all the fashion to be a 'Bolshie', as people then called it.
England was full of half-baked antinomian opinions. Pacifism,
internationalism, humanitarianism of all kinds, feminism, free love,
divorce-reform, atheism, birth-control--things like these were getting a
better hearing than they would get in normal times. And of course the
revolutionary mood extended to those who had been too young to fight, even
to public schoolboys. At that time we all thought of ourselves as
enlightened creatures of a new age, casting off the orthodoxy that had been
forced upon us by those detested 'old men'. We retained, basically, the
snobbish outlook of our class, we took it for granted that we could
continue to draw our dividends or tumble into soft jobs, but also it seemed
natural to us to be 'agin the Government'.

We derided the O.T.C., the Christian religion, and perhaps even
compulsory games and the Royal Family, and we did not realize that we were
merely taking part in a world-wide gesture of distaste for war. Two
incidents stick in my mind as examples of the queer revolutionary feeling
of that time. One day the master who taught us English set us a kind of
general knowledge paper of which one of the questions was, 'Whom do you
consider the ten greatest men now living?' Of sixteen boys in the class
(our average age was about seventeen) fifteen included Lenin in their list.
This was at a snobbish expensive public school, and the date was 1920, when
the horrors of the Russian Revolution was still fresh in everyone's mind.
Also there were the so-called peace celebrations in 1919. Our elders had
decided for us that we should celebrate peace in the traditional manner by
whooping over the fallen foe. We were to march into the school-yard,
carrying torches, and sing jingo songs of the type of 'Rule Britannia'. The
boys--to their honour, I think--guyed the whole proceeding and sang
blasphemous and seditious words to the tunes provided. I doubt whether
things would happen in quite that manner now. Certainly the public
schoolboys I meet nowadays, even the intelligent ones, are much more right-
wing in their opinions than I and my contemporaries were fifteen years ago.

Hence, at the age of seventeen or eighteen, I was both a snob and a
revolutionary. I was against all authority. I had read and re-read the
entire published works of Shaw, Wells, and Galsworthy (at that time still
regarded as dangerously 'advanced' writers), and I loosely described myself
as a Socialist. But I had not much grasp of what Socialism meant, and no
notion that the working class were human beings. At a distance, and through
the medium of books--Jack London's The People of the Abyss, for instance
--I could agonize over their sufferings, but I still hated them and
despised them when I came anywhere near them. I was still revolted by their
accents and infuriated by their habitual rudeness. One must remember that
just then, immediately after the war, the English working class were in a
fighting mood. That was the period of the great coal strikes, when a miner
was thought of as a fiend incarnate and old ladies looked under their beds
every night lest Robert Smillie should be concealed there. All through the
war and for a little time afterwards there had been high wages and abundant
employment; things were now returning to something worse than normal, and
naturally the working class resisted. The men who had fought had been lured
into the army by gaudy promises, and now they were coming home to a world
where there were no jobs and not even any houses. Moreover, they had been
at war and were coming home with the soldier's attitude to life, which is
fundamentally, in spite of discipline, a lawless attitude. There was a
turbulent feeling in the air.

People had not yet settled down to a lifetime of unemployment
mitigated by endless cups of tea. They still vaguely expected the Utopia
for which they had fought, and even more than before they were openly
hostile to the aitch-pronouncing class. So to the shock-absorbers of the
bourgeoisie, such as myself, 'common people' still appeared brutal and
repulsive. Looking back upon that period, I seem to have spent half the
time in denouncing the capitalist system and the other half in raging over
the insolence of bus-conductors.

When I was not yet twenty I went to Burma, in the Indian Imperial
Police. In an 'outpost of Empire' like Burma the class-question appeared at
first sight to have been shelved. There was no obvious class-friction here,
because the all-important thing was not whether you had been to one of the
right schools but whether your skin was technically white. As a matter of
fact most of the white men in Burma were not of the type who in England
would be called 'gentlemen', but except for the common soldiers and a few
nondescripts they lived lives appropriate to 'gentlemen'--had servants,
that is, and called their evening meal 'dinner'--and officially they were
regarded as being all of the same class. They were 'white men', in
contradistinction to the other and inferior class, the 'natives'. But one
did not feel towards the 'natives' as one felt to-wards the 'lower classes'
at home. The essential point was that the 'natives', at any rate the
Burmese, were not felt to be physically repulsive. One looked down on them
as 'natives', but one was quite ready to be physically intimate with them;
and this, I noticed, was the case even with white men who had the most
vicious colour prejudice. I felt towards a Burman almost as I felt
towards a woman. Like most other races, the Burmese have a distinctive
smell--I cannot describe it: it is a smell that makes one's teeth tingle
--but this smell never disgusted me. (Incidentally, Orientals say that we
smell. The Chinese, I believe, say that a white man smells like a corpse.
The Burmese say the same--though no Burman was ever rude enough to say so
to me.) And in a way my attitude was defensible, for if one faces the fact
one must admit that most Mongolians have much nicer bodies than most white
men. Compare the firm-knit silken skin of the Burman, which does not
wrinkle at all till he is past forty, and then merely withers up like a
piece of dry leather, with the coarse-grained, flabby, sagging skin of the
white man. The white man has lank ugly hair growing down his legs and the
backs of his arms and in an ugly patch on his chest. The Burman has only a
tuft or two of stiff black hair at the appropriate places; for the rest he
is quite hairless and is usually beardless as well. The white man almost
always goes bald, the Burman seldom or never. The Burman's teeth are
perfect, though generally discoloured by betel juice, the white man's teeth
invariably decay. The white man is generally ill-shaped, and when he grows
fat he bulges in improbable places; the Mongol has beautiful bones and in
old age he is almost as shapely as in youth. Admittedly the white races
throw up a few individuals who for a few years are supremely beautiful; but
on the whole, say what you will, they are far less comely than Orientals.
But it was not of this that I was thinking when I found the English 'lower
classes' so much more repellant than Burmese 'natives'. I was still
thinking in terms of my early-acquired class-prejudice. When I was not much
past twenty I was attached for a short time to a British regiment. Of
course I admired and liked the private soldiers as any youth of twenty
would admire and like hefty, cheery youths five years older than himself
with the medals of the Great War on their chests. And yet, after all, they
faintly repelled me; they were 'common people' and I did not care to be too
close to them. In the hot mornings when the company marched down the road,
myself in the rear with one of the junior subalterns, the steam of those
hundred sweating bodies in front made my stomach turn. And this, you
observe, was pure prejudice. For a soldier is probably as inoffensive,
physically, as it is possible for a male white person to be. He is
generally young, he is nearly always healthy from fresh air and exercise,
and a rigorous discipline compels him to be clean. But I could not see it
like that. All I knew was that it was lower-class sweat that I was
smelling, and the thought of it made me sick.

When later on I got rid of my class-prejudice, or part of it, it was
in a roundabout way and by a process that took several years.