When it comes to winning elections as a Democrat in the modern era, Joe Manchin is the GOAT. West Virginia is the second most pro-Trump state in the US, yet Joe Manchin won re-election there as a Democrat in 2018. Six years prior, he won by a landslide at the same time as Obama was getting crushed by Romney — more than a 50 point overperformance. If Democrats could replicate nationwide even a fraction of Manchin’s crossover appeal in West Virginia, they’d permanently control Congress. And while it may be possible to chalk up some of Manchin’s success to West Virginia being an ancestrally Democratic state, that’s certainly not the full picture. Grant County in West Virginia is actually one of the most ancestrally Republican places in the country, it has never once voted Democratic for President. In 2018, Manchin outperformed Hillary Clinton by 29 points in Grant County. He’s not just good at winning MAGA Democrats, he’s good at winning MAGA Republicans too.

So, why is Manchin so OP? My answer is straightforward: he’s much closer to West Virginians on policy than any other recent Democratic member of Congress. The very same things that have made Manchin so hated by the progressive Democratic base are what endear him to conservative West Virginians. He’s significantly to the right of the average Democratic politician on most issues, but especially so on issues where West Virginians are very conservative (energy & climate) and less so on issues where West Virginians are more moderate (healthcare).

An alternative explanation is that it’s just Manchin as a guy. He’s been around in West Virginia politics for ages, back to when the state used to be controlled by the Democrats, and he was a popular former Governor before he was Senator. He’s well-liked and fits the state well. I would argue that this explanation creates a chicken-and-egg problem where you have to explain how he became well-known and well-liked in the first place, but that’s not the criticism I’m going to focus on today. The thing I want to focus on is that if West Virginians like Joe Manchin on a personal level, then it’s really bizarre that his crossover support seems to vary significantly depending on how he’s been voting recently. Really bizarre.

Manchin entered the Senate in 2010 after winning a special election. He spent the next two years being a reliably moderate/conservative vote, significantly to the right of the average Senate Democrat. He frequently broke with the party on issues such as coal, immigration, and Don’t Ask Don’t Tell. He did, however, vote against repealing Obamacare. Come November 2012, Manchin had clearly shown West Virginians the kind of Democrat he was and he was re-elected by 24 points, a significantly increased win margin from 2010 against the same opponent.

In the following six years, Manchin was still consistently to the right of the Democratic mainstream, but he took more votes that could be seen as dicey for the median West Virginian voter. Likely because of this and a deteriorating political environment for Democrats in West Virginia, he only narrowly won re-election in 2018.

Now the really interesting part of the story comes in late 2021 / early 2022. At this point Manchin has essentially torpedoed Biden’s legislative agenda. He’s a no on Build Back Better, and he won’t weaken the filibuster to pass voting rights legislation. Joe Manchin has become a villain within his own party. Yet his constituents are loving it! Per Morning Consult, his approval rating in WV hit 57% in the first quarter of 2022, up significantly from before he killed BBB. In reality, his crossover appeal was even bigger than this number suggests, because that same poll showed him more popular with Republicans than with Democrats. With 69% job approval among Republicans, it’s likely he would’ve obliterated any Republican opponent had an election been held in early 2022. It’s not just Morning Consult that showed this either. West Virginia’s 2nd congressional district was having a competitive Republican primary at this point, and a poll showed that Manchin was one of the most popular politicians with the Republican primary electorate, moreso than either of the two House candidates or West Virginia’s Republican Senator, Shelley Moore Capito.

This is pretty insane to compare to any other Democrat’s crossover appeal. Even the most popular Democratic politicians would be lucky to hit 25% approval with a regular Republican primary electorate. Manchin is beloved by these people, the man who stood up to Joe Biden. A regular conservative hero.

Of course, the story doesn’t end there. Manchin eventually votes for the Inflation Reduction Act, which becomes Biden’s signature legislative achievement. A few months later, Morning Consult shows his approval rating back down to 38% in West Virginia, with nearly all of the drop coming from Republicans. His approval rating has actually bounced back with Democrats slightly, not that it’s much good to him for a general election. By voting for the IRA, Manchin saved his legacy as a halfway-decent Senator, but he doomed his own re-election. He did not run in 2024.

What I want to get across here is that there’s a very easy story you can tell about how this all works. West Virginian voters liked Joe Manchin a decade ago because he was one of the most conservative Democrats in the Senate. By the end of the 2010s he was still far more popular than most Democrats, but his appeal had faded somewhat. In 2021 he makes his big stand as the Democrat who won’t vote with Biden and conservatives in West Virginia love it. Then, in late 2022, he essentially rug-pulls them, votes for this progressive legislation and he hits a record low in support. He’s still much more well-liked than your regular Democrat, thanks to his long record of being moderate, but the IRA vote has ended his chances of popularity in a Trump+40 state, unless or until he can somehow kill another major Democratic bill. He doesn’t get that chance.

In the world where West Virginians decide their opinion of Manchin based on his personal characteristics, I am left perplexed at this series of events. Did Manchin suddenly get a charisma injection in late 2021, around the same time he announced his opposition to BBB? Did he get a charisma-ectomy a year later? I don’t think you can construct a plausible story here, although I’d welcome someone to try.

To me, the lesson of The Parable of Joe Manchin is clear. Republican voters like it when you stop Democrats from doing progressive stuff. They don’t like it when you do progressive stuff. The default assumption is that as a Democrat, you will mostly do progressive stuff. If you occasionally and very prominently vote against progressive stuff, you will get cred with Republican voters that will often be enough to win in red states. The age of Democrats winning in West Virginia is unfortunately over. But even after his vote for IRA, Manchin probably could’ve outran Biden by at least 10-15 points last year, and that would’ve been enough in a state like Ohio or Texas. Winning Senate seats in states like these is crucial, so we need more Democrats willing to buck the party occasionally. The alternative is being locked out of power.