The excitement of a midterm election is not felt equally around the US. Somewhere like Toledo, Ohio may see many millions in campaign spending next year, owing to competitive races for House, Senate and Governor. At the same time, general elections in states such as Hawaii or Mississippi are likely to be sleepy affairs.

Accordingly, election analysts and enthusiasts will be spending most of their time looking at the interesting states, the high-profile races that could decide control of Congress. A poll of Iowa is likely to garner many more clicks and retweets than a poll of Alabama. And yet, it is in the boring states, the states where the stakes are low, where we might end up seeing the most unexpected results.

This observation is downstream of the historically unusual position Democrats find themselves in — they exhibit such an intense advantage with the most highly engaged voters that it’s essentially better for them if no one campaigns at all. Every time a voter is reminded that the midterm elections are happening, that’s a point for the Republicans. This can lead to an interesting pattern in congressional special elections, whereby Democrats have generally exceeded expectations and put up incredible overperformances, except in instances where a threshold of competitiveness is crossed, and spending and interest surges on both sides, resulting in a bigger-than-expected Republican win (as we saw in FL-06 and TN-07).

The best way for Democrats to flip a deep red (Trump+15 or more) House seat is to catch the Republicans off-guard and win through a significant turnout advantage. Unfortunately, this should prove highly difficult in states where turnout is going to be high anyway, due to competitive races for Senate or Governor. This brings us back to the boring states, the states that don’t have much going on in their midterms. It was noted earlier this month that the special election in TN-07 actually saw the same number of votes cast as in the 2022 midterm elections. This is partially due to that special having high turnout, but it’s more a function of Tennesseeans having very little reason to go to the polls in 2022, with no major competitive races on the ballot. Now, it does look like 2026 will see higher nationwide turnout than 2022, perhaps significantly more. Nevertheless, the fact that Democrats were able to overperform Harris by 14% in this Tennessee special (and with a weak candidate) does suggest that there might be some Trump+14ish districts that are ripe for the taking, if turnout is low enough.

All told, I can count twelve districts which Trump won by less than 20%, currently rated as “Safe Republican” by Cook Political Report and Sabato’s Crystal Ball, and which should have no competitive races for Senate or Governor alongside them to juice turnout: AR-02, IN-05, MD-01, MO-02, NJ-02, NY-02, OK-05, SC-01, SC-02, TN-05, VA-05, WA-05.

Many of these will be extremely tough to flip for various reasons. For example, WA-05 will probably have high turnout despite no Senate race, and features a reasonably strong Republican incumbent. But after seeing what Democrats have been able to do in low-turnout special elections this year, I wouldn’t be too surprised if Democrats manage to flip one or two of the districts on this list, even if they simultaneously fall short in a couple of high-profile, high-turnout races.